How to Become a Data Scientist in 2023?















Lesson 12 of 14By Avijeet Biswal















Companies worldwide have always gathered and analyzed data about their customers to provide better service and improve their bottom lines. In today’s digital world, we are able to gather tremendous amounts of data, which require non-traditional data processing methods and software.
​​A data scientist is a professional who specializes in analyzing and interpreting data. They use their data science skills to help organizations make better decisions and improve their operations. Data scientists typically have a strong background in mathematics, statistics, and computer science. They use this knowledge to analyze large data sets and find trends or patterns. Additionally, data scientists may develop new ways to collect and store data.
Your Data Science Career Starts Today!Caltech Post Graduate Program in Data ScienceExplore Program
To become a data scientist, you will need to have strong analytical and mathematical skills. You should be able to understand and work with complex data sets. Additionally, you should be able to use statistical software packages and be familiar with programming languages such as Python or R. Data scientists also typically have a certification from an accredited program.
Becoming a data scientist generally requires a very strong background in mathematics and computer science, as well as experience working with large amounts of data. In addition, it is often helpful to have experience with machine learning and statistical modeling.
While there is no one specific path to becoming a data scientist, here are some helpful prerequisites or experiences that can improve your chances of success:
Read More: Switching to data science was one of the best decisions Ekta Saraogi took for her career. After a varied career in the IT field, our Data Scientist Master's Program offered her the variety she craved with a more stable environment for her career. Read all about Saraogi’s career from IT nomad to Data Science master in her Simplilearn Data Science Course Review.
Data science is the area of study that involves extracting knowledge from all of the data gathered. There is a great demand for professionals who can turn data analysis into a competitive advantage for their organizations. In a career as a data scientist, you’ll create data-driven business solutions and analytics.
A great way to get started in Data Science is to get a bachelor’s degree in a relevant field such as data science, statistics, or computer science. It is one of the most common criteria companies look at for hiring data scientists. 
While a Bachelor’s degree might give you a theoretical understanding of the subject, it is essential to brush up on relevant programming languages such as Python, R, SQL, and SAS. These are essential languages when it comes to working with large datasets.
In addition to different languages, a Data Scientist should also have knowledge of working with a few tools for Data Visualization, Machine Learning, and Big Data. When working with big datasets, it is crucial to know how to handle large datasets and clean, sort, and analyze them.
Tool and skill-specific certifications are a great way to show your knowledge and expertise about your skills.  Here are a few great certifications to help you pave the path:
These two are the most popular tools used by Data Scientist experts and would be a perfect addition to start your career journey.
Internships are a great way to get your foot in the door to companies hiring data scientists. Seek jobs that include keywords such as  data analyst, business intelligence analyst, statistician, or data engineer. Internships are also a great way to learn hands-on what exactly the job with entail.
Once your internship period is over, you can either join in the same company (if they are hiring), or you can start looking for entry-level positions for data scientists, data analysts, data engineers. From there you can gain experience and work up the ladder as you expand your knowledge and skills.
Did you know that media services provider Netflix uses data science extensively? The company measures user engagement and retention, including:
Netflix has over 120 million users worldwide! To process all of that information, Netflix uses advanced data science metrics. This allows it to present a better movie and show recommendations to its users and also create better shows for them. The Netflix hit series House of Cards was developed using data science and big data. Netflix collected user data from the show, West Wing, another drama taking place in the White House. The company took into consideration where people stopped when they fast-forwarded and where they stopped watching the show. Analyzing this data allowed Netflix to create what it believed was a perfectly engrossing show.
Now let us explore some of the important data scientist skills that an individual should possess.
Data Science Career Boot CampThe Ultimate Ticket to Top Data Science Job RolesExplore Course
To become a data scientist, you’ll need to master skills in the following areas:

Once you’ve mastered these skills, you’ll have a range of career opportunities available. Prepare for a job interview with our data science interview questions.
Average salary: $120,931
Data scientists create data-driven business solutions and analytics by driving optimization and improvement of product development. They use predictive modeling to increase and optimize customer experiences, revenue generation, ad targeting, and more. Data scientists also coordinate with different functional teams to implement models and monitor outcomes.

Average salary: $137,776
Data engineers assemble large, complex data sets. They identify, design, and implement internal process improvements and then build the infrastructure required for optimal data extraction, transformation, and loading. They also build analytics tools that utilize the data pipeline.
Average salary: $112,764
Data architects analyze the structural requirements for new software and applications and develop database solutions. They install and configure information systems and migrate data from legacy systems to new ones.
Average salary: $65,470
Data analysts acquires data from primary or secondary sources and maintain databases. They interpret that data, analyze results using statistical techniques, and develop data collections systems and other solutions that help management prioritize business and information needs.
Average salary: $70,170
Business analysts assist a company with planning and monitoring by eliciting and organizing requirements. They validate resource requirements and develop cost-estimate models by creating informative, actionable and repeatable reporting.
Average salary: $54,364
Data administrators assist in database design and update existing databases. They are responsible for setting up and testing new database and data handling systems, sustaining the security and integrity of databases and creating complex query definitions that allow data to be extracted.
In order to be successful in their role, data scientists need to have strong problem-solving skills. They must be able to think critically and identify patterns in data sets. Additionally, they need to be proficient in programming languages and statistical software in order to manipulate data.
Some common tasks that data scientists perform include cleaning and organizing data sets, running statistical analyses, and creating data visualizations. Additionally, they may also be responsible for building predictive models and conducting research.
The demand for data scientists is growing rapidly, and the career prospects are very good. Data scientists with the necessary skills and experience can find jobs in a variety of industries, including healthcare, finance, retail, and manufacturing.
Some common challenges that data scientists face include dealing with big data sets, working with complex algorithms, and finding ways to visualize data. Additionally, they may also need to communicate their findings to non-technical audiences.
Simplilearn’s Artificial Intelligence and Data Science course is an integrated program in AI and data science that includes the following intense courses to prepare you for an exciting career in data science:
Mastering the field of data science begins with understanding and working with the core technology frameworks used for analyzing big data. You’ll learn the developmental and programming frameworks Hadoop and Spark used to process massive amounts of data in a distributed computing environment, and develop expertise in complex data science algorithms and their implementation using R, the preferred language for statistical processing. The insights you will glean from the data are presented as consumable reports using data visualization platforms such as Tableau.
Once you have mastered data management and predictive analytic techniques, you will gain exposure to state-of-the-art machine learning technologies. This expansive data science learning path will help you excel across the entire spectrum of big data and data science technologies and techniques.
Simplilearn’s Data Science course is exhaustive, and earning a certificate is proof that you have taken a big leap in mastering the domain. The knowledge and skills you’ll gain working on projects and simulations and examining case studies will set you ahead of the competition.


Avijeet is a Senior Research Analyst at Simplilearn. Passionate about Data Analytics, Machine Learning, and Deep Learning, Avijeet is also interested in politics, cricket, and football.
Advanced Certificate Program in Data Science 
Caltech Post Graduate Program in Data Science 
Data Scientist 
*Lifetime access to high-quality, self-paced e-learning content.
Data Science Salary Report
Data Science Career Guide: A Comprehensive Playbook To Becoming A Data Scientist
Best Data Science Books for an Aspiring Data Scientist
The Best Introduction to Data Science
How to Build a Career in Data Science?
Data Science Interview Guide
© 2009 -2023- Simplilearn Solutions
Follow us!
Company
Work with us
Discover
For Businesses
Learn On the Go!
Trending Post Graduate Programs
Trending Master Programs
Trending Courses
Trending Resources
